Practical irfan
Who is an arif

                                  ‫اميرالمؤمنين‬:
  ‫العارف من عرف نفسه فاعتقها و نزهها عن كل ما‬
                                        ‫يبعدها‬

The knower is the one who knows his soul and
  frees it and purifies it from whatever keeps it
  at bay.
The Law, the Path, the Truth

Al-Shari’ah confirming the injunctions of the Prophet and practising them
The ship

Al-Tariqah realising the manners and attitudes of the Prophet in one’s own self
The see

Al-Haqiqa becoming like them and seeing what they see
The pearl
 ‫الشريعة اقوالي والطريقة افعالي و الحقيقة احوالي‬

Shari’ah is my words, tariqah is my deeds,
  haqiqah is my states
The Law, the Path, the Truth

Shaykh Najm al-Din al-Kubra:


  Tasawuf is of three types: the Law, the Path and the Truth. The
  Law is like a ship and the Path like a see and the Truth like the
  pearl. Whoever wants the pearl must ride on the ship and sail
  in the see to reach it. Anyone abandoning such an order would
  not find the pearl. Therefore if you see someone flying in the air
  or walking on the see or eating fire or showing any other similar
  karamat while they abandon even one injunction of God or one
  Sunna of the Prophet you should know that they are liars and
  what they do is not karamah but is magic.
IRFAN is about true practice which
leads to knowledge

The great mystic Muhammad Bahari:
Jurisprudence is an introductory means for
  purification of morals
Good morals is an introductory means for
  knowledge of tawhid
Shari’a and Haqiqa and Tariqa

Mawla Abd al-Samad Hamadani:
 Shari’a and Haqiqa and Tariqa are different names for
  the same reality seen from different perspectives;
  there is no difference between them but in depth and
  levels. Shari’a is the shell, tariqa is the core and
  haqiqa is the kernel.

  The example of this in salat is that it is serving
  (khidma), coming close (qurba) and arriving (wusla).
  The service is the rank of shari’a, coming close is the
  rank of tariqa and arriving is the rank of haqiqa.
Shari’a
          tariqa

haqiqa
Shari’a, Haqiqa, Tariqa

Therefore:
     ‫ والحقيقة اان‬، ‫ والطريقة ان تحضره‬، ‫الشريعة ان تعبده‬
                                               ‫تشهده‬

,Shari’a is to worship Him
,tariqa is to go to His presence
Haqiqa is to witness Him

‘
‫‪Shari’a, Haqiqa, Tariqa‬‬

     ‫الحقيقة‬     ‫الطريقة‬       ‫الشريعة‬


  ‫حق اليقين‬     ‫عين اليقين‬   ‫علم اليقين‬

      ‫االيقان‬      ‫االيمان‬      ‫االسالم‬

  ‫باطن الباطن‬     ‫الباطن‬        ‫الظاهر‬

    ‫خاص لخاص‬      ‫الخاص‬           ‫العام‬
Shari’a, Haqiqa, Tariqa

                                  ‫عن موالنا امير المؤمنين‬:
 ‫ و‬،‫ فمن وصل الى الشبر االول تكبر وادعى‬،‫العلم ثالثة اشبار‬
     ‫ ومن وصل الى‬، ‫من وصل الى الشبر الثاني تواضع و ذل‬
                       ‫الشبر الثالث افتقر وعلم انه ما علم‬.

Knowledge is three spans; whoever attains the first
  span becomes arrogant and pretentious; whoever
  attains the second span becomes humble and lowly;
  whoever attains the third span becomes indigent and
  annihilate and would know that he does not know.
Stepping up the scales of irfan
The Path

Issac of Nineveh
(of 7th century, Nestorian Church):


Human being consists of:              The Path consists of:

The body                              Repentance
The lower soul (nafs)                 Purification
The higher soul (ruh)                 Perfection
The Path

Repentance: works of righteousness performed with the body:
   fasting, alms-giving, night vigils



Purification: virtues of lower soul: like neighbourly love, humility,
     forbearance



Perfection: gifts bestowed by God: delight, exultation and love
Stepping up the scales of irfan

1- furbishing (tajliyah)               ‫تجليه‬

2- abandoning (takhliyah, tazkiyyah)   ‫تخليه‬

3- adorning (tahliyah)                  ‫تحليه‬

4- annihilation (fana)                    ‫فنا‬
Degrees of takhliyah

1- separation (‫)تفريق‬
Separation between the knower and whatever diverts him from
  God
2- dusting off (‫)نفض‬
Dusting off traces of those diversions even desires for them
3- abandonment(‫)ترك‬
Abandoning everything for His sake
4- rejection(‫)رفض‬
Rejecting his own self
fana            ‫فنا‬
baqa ‫بقا‬



       Annihilation
            &
        Survival
             on ‘passing away and
Julian Baldick
survival’, fana & baqa’ (Mystical Islam P. 49)

There were differing views   So too it is not clear what
  about what is made to        survives:
  “pass away”:

the lower soul,              God alone,
man’s attributes,            man with God’s attributes,
or man’s entire individual   or man as an original idea in
personality?                 the mind of God?
Alexander Knysh (Islamic Mysticism/2000)

Two complementary definitions of fana:
1- passing away of all things from the consciousness of
   the mystic, including self perception; this experiential
   vacuum is filled by a pure consciousness of God that
   precludes any perception of others.

2- “falling away” of the imperfect attributes of the fallible
   creature and their replacement by the perfect
   attributes of the Divine Self (P. 310).
In other words

Fana is:
1- the annihilation of self perception of the
  mystic in perceiving the unveiled reality of
  God

2- the annihilation of human characteristics of
  the mystic that would pave the way for
  attaining the attributes of God (Yathribi, P. 497).
Alexander Knysh (Islamic Mysticism/2000)

Unlike Nirvana, with which fana is often compared in
  Western studies of sufism, these definitions of fana
  present it not as a mere cessation of individual
  experience, but as the development of a more ample
  and perfect selfhood that is adorned by divine
  presence.

Fana should never be construed as a fusion of divine
  and human essence, which was seen as the root of
  the erroneous doctrine of incarnation in Christianity.
Yahya Yathribi on fana

 Fana is not a negative process but a positive one
 It is breaking the lower limits and going to the higher
  stations
 It is returning to the original selfhood of man, to
  where it belongs to
 It is breaking the walls of illusion
 It is going out of the imaginary YOU to the real YOU
                                      (Irfan Nadhari, 1380, P. 430)
Rumi’s poem on fana

                    ‫گر چه این وصلت بقا اندر بقاست‬
     ‫لیک در اول فنا اندر‬
                                         ‫فنایت‬

Although joining with God
                            is all survival in survival
however at the beginning
                        it is annihilation in annihilation
What happens after fana
From Qeysari’s introduction to the ta’iyya of Ibn al-Farid:

After fana the aarif may:
1- be attracted to the divine lights and become mesmerized by the beauty
    of God for ever
2- become mesmerised for a while during which time taklif is removed
    from them
3- fall into the pitfall of licentiousness and irreligionist position since they
    can not distinguish between themselves and the Lord
4- is established in the position of “al-farq ba’d al-jam’” or “sahw ba’d al-
    mahw” seeing both unity and diversity, both God and the creation,
    without being veiled by one from the other (look at the story of Khidr
    and Musa)
Baqa’ bi-llah

Man’s continual existence in God, after he has acquired
  some of the divine attributes.
This is accompanied by mystic’s renewed
  consciousness of the plurality of the created world.

Fana is intoxication (sukr/‫ )سكر‬and baqa is soberity
  (sahw/‫) صحو‬
Degrees of fana

Fana is to watch the beauty and the glory of God

Annihilation in actions (mahw/‫) محو‬
                                    ‫ال حول وال قوة اال بالله‬
Annihilation in attributes (tams/ ‫)طمس‬
                                                ‫ال اله اال الله‬
Annihilation in the essenc (mahq/‫) محق‬
                                    ‫يا هو يا من ليس اال هو‬
Al-asfar al-arba’at al-
       ilahiyya

The four divine journeys of the
             mystic
  The four journeys of man
     towards perfection
1- the journey from creation to the haqq

2- the journey by haqq in the haqq

3- the journey from the haqq
   back to the creation by the haqq

4- the journey in the creation by the
  haqq
journey from creation to
the
                    haqq
In this stage the wayfarer removes all the dark
  and the luminous veils from before his eyes.
 The Dark veils belong to the position of nafs

 The Luminous veils belong to the position of

  qalb and Ruh
 In this journey the wayfarer moves from the

  position of nafs to the position of qalb to the
  position of ruh
 This journey culminates in fana, annihilattion

  of the wayfarer
  Journey by haqq in the
                    haqq
It is by haqq because now the aarif has nothing
   of himself and is under complete wilaya of
   God

He moves in the realm of asmaa’ and learns
 about all the names one after the other,
 except those names the knowledge of which
 exclusively belongs to God or to people of
 higher calibre

At the end of this journey fana, annihilation, is
  replaced by baqa’, survival and the aarif
  comes back from mahw to sahw
journey from the haqq back
to the creation by the haqq
In this journey the aarif comes back from God to
  the world under the wilaya of the Lord. He would
  take a tour of jabarut, malakut and nasut and
  observes all these worlds and the way they are
  attached to God.

      ‫و كذلك نرى ابراهيم ملكوت السموات واالرض و ليكون من‬
                                              ‫الموقنين‬
And as such we showed Ibrahim the malakut of the
  Heavens and the Earth so that he be reassured
  (6/75)

He now knows about the attributes and the acts of
 Allah and could inform others about it.
 Journey in the creation by
         the haqq
In this journey the aarif is acquainted with the
  reality of beings, their qualities and their
  effects in this world and the next

He also sees the quality of the actions and their
 consequences and the way everything
 returns to Allah

He can inform us of the harms and benefits of
 everything and the causes for felicity or
 misery

This station belonds to the Prophets only
