               Sufi tariqa
              terminology
Path

Brotherhood

Fraternity

order
           What is a tariqa?
The emergence of the brotherhoods in
 reality meant the emergence of ‘elders’
 with specific programmes of instruction,
 linked to a founder who is believed to have
 instituted their method.

Every brotherhood has a ‘chain’, silsila,
 which is its pedigree of masters going
 back to the Prophet.
              What is a tariqa?

‘Path’ within another ‘path’ (sub-brotherhood)
Within the ‘chain’ of a given brotherhood a particularly
  strong and effective personality may well produce a sub-
  brotherhood. His forcefulness may provide a new series
  of teachings, or a revival of old ones.

Most commonly this will be reflected in a double-barrelled
  label embodying the names of the two founders.

The sub-brotherhood may later achieve such great
  importance that the name of the original brotherhood is
  lost.
In later centuries it is common for a Muslim
  to belong to two or more ‘paths’ at the
  same time, and engage in practices which
  are forbidden in one (such as simaa’) but
  permitted in another.
                              Sufi tariqas
Qadiriyya (Abd al-Qadir Jilani, d. 561/1166)
Suhrawardiyya (Abd al-Qahir Suhrawardi, d. 563/1168)
Shadhiliyya (Abu al-Hasan Ali al-Shadhili, d. 656/1258)
Naqshbandiyya (Baha’ al-Din Muhammad Naqshband, 791/1389)
Kubrawiyya (Najm al-Din Kubra, d. 617/1220)
Chishtiya (after a village called Chisht in Eastern Iran) mainly based in India
Tijaniya (founded by Ahmad al-Tijani born in Algeria in 1737 and died in Morocco in 1815)
          Sufi tariqas in Turky
• Khalwatiya: founded in the 15th century
So called because of its emphasis on khawa, the
  sufi practice of solitary retreat for forty days.

• Bektashi: founded at the start of the 14th century
  by a man called Bektash from north eastern Iran.
The most disreputable of the recognized
  brotherhoods; allowing wine drinking and
  licentious behaviour
Abd al-Qadir Jilani (d. 561/1166)
Born in Gilan north of Iran in 471 A.H.

Travelled to Baghdad to learn Hanbali fiqh at the age of 17

His conversion to sufism occurred at the hand of the stern sufi master Abu al-
Kahayr al-Dabbas (d. 523/1131)

In 521/1127, at the age of 50, following a dream that urged him to impart his
knowledge to the people he returned to social life and became a fiery Hanbali
preacher

His principle work is ‘That which is Sufficient for the Seekers of the Path of the
Truth’‫غنیه لطالبی طریق الحق‬

Ghunya was a standard exposition of the ethical and moral precepts incumbent
on the Sunni Muslim, however it was criticized by Ibn Taymiyya for its mystical
litanies and supererogatory acts
Abd al-Qadir Jilani (d. 561/1166)
His shrine in Baghdad was rebuilt by the order of
the Ottoman Sultan Sulaymanin 941/1535

His tariqa continues to enjoy a wide following in
Indo-Pakistan subcontinent and in Turkey

Among Indian Muslims his name is invoked
whenever cholera or any other epidemic strikes
a certain area or city
Suhrawardiyya (Abu al-Najib Abd al-Qahir Suhrawardi
                           , d. 563/1168)

      & his nephew Umar Suhrawardi d. 638/1243



Born about 490/1097 in Suhraward in the province of Jibal in Iran

Traced his genealogy to the first Caliph Abu Bakr

Studied under Ahmad al-Ghazali (d. 520/1126) in Isfahan

On his return to Baghdad he became a disciple of Hammad al-Dabbas
  (d. 525/1131), the mentor of al-Jilani
                        Suhrawardiyya

He taught at Nizammiyya while he was a sufi and among his students
  were Ibn al-Asakir (d. 571/1176) and al-Sam’ani

His fame is largely due to his disciple and nephew Shihab al-Din Abu
   Hafs Umar al-Suhrawardi (not to be confused by Shihab al-Din
   Yahya Suhrawardi the Illuminationist philosopher) who was the true
   founder of Suhrawardiyya and the author of the last classical sufi
   manual Awarif al-Ma’arif

This tariqa is best known for the practice of perpetually reciting the
   formula ‫ الاله اال الله‬until the ‘remembrance of the tongue’ becomes a
   ‘remembrance of the heart’. Then the heart becomes empty of
   everything and God manifests himself within it.
              Suhrawardiyya

The Suhrawardiyya emphasizes the
 importance of the canonical prayer, dhikr
 and fasting of Ramadan.

Modification of the dhikr exercised along the
 lines of Yogic mysticism, which were
 practiced by Chishtiyya, are absent from
 Suhrawardi rituals (knysh, P. 207)
Baha’ al-Din Muhammad b. Muhammad
  Naqshband, (718- 791/1318-1389)
This central Asian sufi derived his name from the
craft of embroidering, however his name is more
commonly taken to refer to fixing, in the purified
tablet of the heart, of the imprint of the name
Allah by means of a silent and permanent dhikr.

His descent is attributed to Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq
and he was known in his birth place, Bukhara,
ad Khaaji-e Balaa gardaan, “the averter of
disaster”
  Baha’ al-Din Muhammad b. Muhammad
    Naqshband, (718- 791/1318-1389)
He was an associate of Ghazan Khan, the
 Mongol ruler for some time

He is buried in Bukhara in Qasr-i Hinduwan
 the hamlet in which he was born and was
 called later on Qasr-i Aarifan out of
 respect for him
                  Naqshbandiyya
Characterized by:

Emphasis on a silent ‘remembrance of God’ as opposed to the usual practice of repeating
  a formula aloud

Denunciation of dancing and listening to music

Deprecation of charismatic feats and saintly miracles ( karaamaat)

Keeping pious company (suhbah) and avoiding retreats (khalwah)

Fidelity to shari’a in social, political and devotional life

Marked hostility to Shii Islam (developed probably after Baha’ al-Din)
This is the only tariqa which does not trace its silsila back to Ali (a)

Rejection of Ibn Arabi’s theory of wahdat al-wujood
           Naqshbandiyya
Distinguishing features:

1- wuquf-i zamaani: “temporal awareness,” the constant
   examination of one’s state during dhikr

2- wuquf-i ‘adadi: “numerical awareness,” the enumeration
   of the times dhikr is performed in order to discourage the
   intrusion of distracting thoughts

3- wuquf-I qalbi: “awareness of the heart,” the direction of
   attention to the physical heart in order to make it
   participate in the work of dhikr
       Naqshbandiyya
The mujaddidi sub-branch of
 Naqshbandiyya was established in India
 by Shaykh Ahmad Sirhindi (d. 1034/1624),
 known as the mujaddid (Renewer)
  Kubrawiyya (Najm al-Din Kubra, d. 617/1220)

Two of Abu Najib Suhrawardi’s disciples
 became masters of Najm al-Din Kubra,
 and since Abu Najib was a student of
 Ahmad Ghazali therefore his silsila goes
 back to him.
      Kubrawiyya (Najm al-Din Kubra, d. 617/1220)

Main propagator: Ala’al-Dawlah Simnani (
Main feature: vision of coloured lights (grey, blue,
 red, white, yellow, black and green)
 corresponding to subtle organs inside the mystic
 (lata’if).

Sub-sects: Nurbakhshiyah; Muhammad Nurbakhsh
  (d. 743/1465), a Shi’ite sufi
  Mu’in al-Din Chishti of Sistan
Originally a contemporary and disciple of
 Shihab al-Din Suhrawardi

He used Awarif al-Ma’arif of the latter as the
 manual for his instructions
               Chishtiya
Chishtiya and Suhrawardiya are main tariqas in
 Multan although they are rivals.

The Chishties accuse the Suhrawardies of
  excessive formality, self enrichment and
  snobbishness.

Modification of the dhikr to be exercised along the
 lines of Yogic mysticism (knysh, P. 207).
      Abul Hasan Ali al-Shadhili
        (593-656/1196-1258)
He was born in Morocco and claimed descent from
 Ali through his elder son al-Hasan

This Maghribi Sufi launched a tariqa which gave
  birth to many dynamic manifestations in Egypt
  and North Africa

Its offshoots later on developed as far as India and
   Indonesia
                    Al-Shadhiliyya
Shadhiliyya emphasises the strictest possible observance of Shari’a

No person who is remiss in implementing the rulings of the Shari’a can
  be seen as a sufi

According to Shadhili “If your mystical unveilings (kashf) diverges from
  the Qur’an and the Sunna, hold fast to the truth of the Qur’an and
  take no notice of your unveilings; tell yourself that the truth of the
  Qur’an and the Sunna is guaranteed by God Most High’ which is not
  the case with unveiling, inspiration and mystical perceptions.”
  (Knysh, P. 209)

Most of its branches are characterised by their strong attachment to
  Sunni orthodoxy
                    Tijaniya
After joining various brotherhoods and travelling
   extensively, Tijani announced that the Prophet
   had appeared to him in daylight and prescribed
   special prayers for the new organization which
   he was to lead.
Tijani claimed to be the Seal of God’s Friends in
   the historical cycle inaugurated by Muhammad
   (AS).
He claimed that the Prophet had ordered him not
   to cut himself off from the world, and so lived in
   luxury.
             Shi’i Tariqas
Ni’matullahiya

Haidariya

Safaviya
                   Ni’matullahiyya
                   Shah Ni’matullah Wali (d. 834/1430)
                              United until


                        Mahjub Ali Shah (d. 1238/1823)

                             Continued through




 Kawthariyyah                 Mast Ali Shah                     Shamsiyyah
Kawthar Ali Shah              (d. 1253/1838)              S. Hussein
 Astarabadi
 (d. 1247/1831)                                          Later by Shams al-
 Urafa
                                                             (d. 1353/1935)
                       Ni’matullahiyya
                              Mast Ali Shah (author of many books)

                              Different branches from which came




Gunabadiyyah                                                     Safi Ali Shahiyyah
 Founded by Mulla Ali                                         Founded by Haj Mirza Hasan
Gunabadi Nur Ali Shah Thani                                      Safi Ali Shah ( ca. 1300)
(d. 1337/1918)

                              Munis Ali Shah (d. 1372/1958)

                                13 claimants

                 The most successful of them Dr Jawad Nur Bakhsh
                             Nur Bakhshiyyah
