Islamic Mysticism



        BA Islamic Studies
        M. S. Bahmanpour
What is irfan about?
Introduction
 ‫َوِمْن آَياِتِه َأْن َخ َلَق َلُكم ِّمْن َأنُفِس ُكْم َأْز َواًج ا ِّلَتْس ُكُنوا ِإَلْيَها َوَجَعَل َبْيَنُكم َّمَوَّدًة َوَر ْح َمًة‬
                                                                                                            ‫ِإَّن ِفي َذِلَك آَل َياٍت‬
                                                                                                                 ‫ِّلَقْوٍم َيَتَفَّكُر وَن‬

And one of His signs is that He created mates for you from yourselves
   that you may find rest in them, and He put between you love and
   compassion; most surely there are signs in this
for a people who reflect. [30:21]
                                          ‫َأ‬               ‫َأ‬
     ‫َوِمْن آَياِتِه َخ ْلُق الَّسَماَواِت َواَأْلْر ِض َواْخ ِتاَل ُف ْلِس َنِتُكْم َو ْلَواِنُكْم ِإَّن ِفي َذِلَك آَل َياٍت‬

                                                                                                                           ‫ِّلْلَعاِلِميَن‬

And one of His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and the
    diversity of your tongues and colors; most surely there are signs in this
for the learned. [30:22]
Introduction
                                    ‫َوِمْن آَياِتِه َمَناُمُكم ِبالَّلْيِل َوالَّنَهاِر َواْبِتَغاُؤُكم ِّمن َفْضِلِه ِإَّن ِفي َذِلَك آَل َياٍت‬
                                                                                                                         ‫ِّلَقْوٍم َيْسَمُعوَن‬

And one of His signs is your sleeping and your seeking of His grace by night and
    (by) day; most surely there are signs in this
for a people who would hear. [30:23]

 ‫َوِمْن آَياِتِه ُيِريُكُم اْلَبْر َق َخ ْوًفا َوَطَمًعا َوُيَنِّز ُل ِمَن الَّسَماء َماء َفُيْح ِيي ِبِه اَأْلْرَض َبْعَد َمْوِتَها ِإَّن ِفي‬
                                                                                                                               ‫َذِلَك آَل َياٍت‬
                                                                                                                         ‫ِّلَقْوٍم َيْعِقُلوَن‬

And one of His signs is that He shows you the lightning for fear and for hope, and
    sends down water from the clouds then gives life therewith to the earth after its
    death; most surely there are signs in this
for a people who understand. [30:24]
What is irfan

To fix one’s inner machine ( soul) to enable it to
  catch the signals of God … and beyond
Supplication in Shaban
‫الهي هب لي كمال االنقطاع اليك و انر ابصار قلوبنا بضياء نظرها اليك حتى تخرق‬
   ‫ابصارالقلوب حجب النور فتصل الى معدن العظمه و تصير ارواحنا معلقة بعز‬
                                                                    ‫قدسك‬
                     ‫الهي واجعلني ممن ناديته فاجابك و الحظته فصعق لجاللك‬

  My Lord, grant me complete severance of my relations with everything
 else
 and total submission to You. Enlighten the eyes of our hearts with the
 light
 of their looking at You to the extent that they penetrate the veils of light
 and reach the Source of Grandeur, and let our souls get suspended by
 the
 glory of Your sanctity.
 My Lord, make me one of those whom You call and they respond;
 when You look
 at and they are thunderstruck by Your majesty. You whisper to them
 secretly
 and they work for You openly.
Supplication in Shaban

    ‫الهي اقمنى فى اهل واليتك مقام من رجا الزيادة من محبتك الهى و‬
         ‫الهمني ولها بذكرك الى ذكرك و همتي في روح نجاح اسمائك‬

 My Lord, place me among Your friends in the position of one
 who hopes for an
 increase in Your love.

 My Lord, inspire me with a passionate love of remember-ing
 You so that I may
 keep on remembering You, and by Your Holy Name and Pure
 Position cherish my
 cheerful determination into a success.
‫ُمناجاة اُلمحبّين‬

    ‫الهي من ذااَّلذي ذاَق َح الَوَة َمَح َّبِتَك َفراَم ِمْنَك َبَدًال‪َ ،‬وَمْن َذا اَّلذي َانِـَس‬
    ‫ِبُقْر ِبَك َفاْبَتغى َعْنَك ِح َوًال ِالـهي َفاْجَعْلنا ِمَّمِن اْصَطَفْيَتُه ِلُقْر ِبَك َوِوالَيِتَك ‪،‬‬
   ‫َوَاْخ َلْصَتُه ِلُوِّدَك َوَمَح َّبِتَك ‪َ ،‬وَش َّوْقَتُه ِالى ِلقاِئَك ‪َ ،‬وَر َّضْيَتُه ِبَقضاِئَك ‪َ ،‬وَمَنْح َتُه‬
       ‫ِبالَّنَظِر ِالى َوْج ِهَك ‪َ ،‬وَحَبْوَتُه ِبِرضاَك ‪َ ،‬وَاَعْذَتُه ِمْن َهْج ِرَك َوِقالَك ‪َ ،‬وَبَّوأَتُه‬
    ‫َمْقَعَد الِّصْدِق في ِج واِرَك ‪َ ،‬وَخ َصْصَتُه ِبَمْعِرَفِتَك ‪َ ،‬وَاَّهْلَتُه ِلِعباَدِتَك ‪َ ،‬وَهَّيْمَت‬
       ‫َقْلَبُه ِِالراَدِتَك ‪َ ،‬واْج َتَبْيَتُه ِلُمشاَهَدِتَك ‪َ ،‬وَاْخ َلْيَت َوْج َهُه َلَك ‪َ ،‬وَفَّر ْغَت ُفؤاَدُه‬
       ‫ِلُحِّبَك ‪َ ،‬وَر َّغْبَتُه فيـما ِع ْنَدَك ‪َ ،‬وَاْلَهْمَتُه ِذْكَر َك ‪َ ،‬وَاْوَز ْعَتُه ُش ْكَر َك ‪َ ،‬وَش َغْلَتُه‬
     ‫ِبطاَعِتَك ‪َ ،‬وَصَّيْر َتُه ِمْن صاِلحي َبِرَّيِتَك ‪َ ،‬واْخ َتْرْأَتُه ِلُمناجاِتَك ‪َ ،‬وَقَطْعَت َعْنُه‬
  ‫ُكَّل َش ْي ء َيْقَطُعُه َعْنَك ‪َ ،‬اّللُهَّم اْجَعْلنا ِمَّمْن َد ُبـهُـُم اِْالْر ِتياُح ِاَلْيَك َواْلَح نيُن ‪،‬‬
  ‫َوَدْهُر ُهُم الَّز ْفَر ُة َواَْالنيُن ‪ِ ،‬ج باُهُهْم ساِج َدٌة ِلَعَظَمِتَك ‪َ ،‬وُعُيوُنُهْم ساِهَر ٌة في‬
                 ‫ِخ ْدَمِتَك ‪َ ،‬وُدُموُعُهْم ساِئَلٌة ِمْن َخ ْش َيِتَك ‪َ ،‬وُقُلوُبُهْم ُمَتَعِّلَقٌة ِبَمَح َّبِتَك ‪،‬‬
                                                                            ‫‪َ،‬وَاْفِئَدُتُهْم ُمْنَخِلَعٌة ِمْن َمهاَبِتَك‬
The Whispered Prayer of the Lovers
1 My God,                                             made pleased with Thy decree,
           who can have tasted the sweetness of                          granted gazing upon Thy
     Thy love,                                         face,
then wanted another in place of Thee?                 shown the favour of Thy good pleasure,
           Who can have become intimate with Thy
                                                                         given refuge from separation
                                                           from Thee and Thy loathing,
     nearness,                                                           settled in a sure sitting place in
then sought removal from Thee?                             Thy neighbourhood,
                                                                         singled out for true knowledge
                                                           of Thee,
2 My God, place us with him                                              made worthy for worship of
           whom Thou hast                                  Thee,
                chosen for Thy nearness and Thy                  whose heart Thou hast captivated
    friendship,                                            with Thy will,
                purified through Thy affection and               whom Thou hast picked for
    Thy love,
                                                           contemplating Thee,
                                                                 whose look Thou hast made empty for
                given yearning for the meeting with        Thee,
    Thee,                                                        whose breast Thou hast freed for Thy
                                                           love,
                                                                 whom Thou hast made
The Whispered Prayer of the Lovers

chosen for whispered prayer to Thee,
and from whom Thou hast cut off all things which cut him off from Thee!
3 O God,
           place us among those
                whose habit is rejoicing in Thee and yearning for Thee,
                  whose time is spent in sighing and moaning!
           Their foreheads are bowed down before Thy mightiness,
                their eyes wakeful in Thy service,
                their tears flowing in dread of Thee,
                their hearts fixed upon Thy love,
                their cores shaken with awe of Thee.
Terminology

 Irfan: from ma’rifah; knowledge and understanding

 Sufism: The term sufiyyah is first used by Jahiz (d. 255) and the first
   person who was called sufi was Abu Hashim al-Kufi (d. 166) (yathribi, P. 29)

 Mysticism: from mystery: To do with bewilderment
                                                and mystification


 Gnosticism: from gnosis: To do with knowledge
Is there any mention of urafa in the
          Quran and hadith
                                                  ‫َقَعِت اْلَواِقَعُة‬Home
                                                                      ‫ِإَذا َو‬
1. When the great event comes to
                   pass,                               )1(
               .........                            .........
 7. And you shall be three sorts.     ‫ًة‬‫َث‬‫َل‬
                                           ‫َث‬ ‫ًا‬      ‫َأ‬
                                                 ‫) َو ُكنُتْم ْز َوج‬7(
               .........
8. Then (as to) the companions of                  .........
    the right hand; how happy are            ‫َأ‬               ‫ْل‬
                                     ‫َف صَح ب ا َمْيَمَنِة َما صَح ب‬       ‫َأ‬
     the companions of the right
                   hand!
               .........                        )8( ‫اْلَمْيَمَنِة‬
9. And (as to) the companions of
     the left hand; how wretched                    .........
    are the companions of the left               ‫َئ‬
                                         ‫َو صَح ب الَْمش َمِة َما‬ ‫َأ‬
                   hand!
                                                     ‫صَح ب‬  ‫َأ‬
               .........
   10. And the foremost are the               )9( ‫الَْمشَئَمِة‬
                foremost,
                                                    .........
               .........
11. These are they who are drawn          ‫َو السِبُقوَن السِبُقوَن‬
            nigh (to Allah),                   ......... )10(
                                                          Home


People of the Right                 ( ‫اصحاب اليمين ( اصحاب‬
  ‫الميمنه‬




   People of the Left                   ‫اصحاب الشمال ( اصحاب‬
                                                   ) ‫المشئمه‬


             The Outstrippers; they brought nigh      ‫السابقون‬
                                                   ) ‫( المقربون‬
                                                    Home
                   ‫المقربون‬
     ‫َوَمن ُيِطِع الّلَه َوالَّر ُس وَل َفُأْوَلـِئَك‬
               ‫م‬     ‫َل‬      ‫ّل‬      ‫َأ‬      ‫َّل‬
       ‫ِه ِّمَن‬    ‫ْي‬  ‫َع‬  ‫َمَع ا َن َم ُه‬
                               ‫ال‬ ‫َع‬‫ْن‬    ‫ي‬‫ِذ‬
       ‫الَّنِبِّييَن َوالِّصِّديِقيَن َوالُّش َهَداء‬
                ‫َك‬     ‫َل‬ ‫ُأ‬
     ‫َوالَّصاِلِح يَن َوَح ُس َن و ـِئ َر ِفيًقا‬
 69. And whoever obeys Allah and the Apostle, these
are with those upon whom Allah has bestowed favors
  from among the prophets and the truthful and the
martyrs and the good, and a goodly company are they!
Encouragements from the Quran

  ‫َش ِهَد الّلُه َأَّنُه َال ِإَلـَه ِإَّال ُهَو َواْلَمَالِئَكُة َوُأْوُلوْا اْلِعْلِم َقآِئَمًا ِباْلِقْس ِط َال ِإَلـَه ِإَّال‬
   ‫ُهَو اْلَعِزيُز اْلَح ِكيُم‬
Allah bears witness that there is no god but He, and (so do) the
   angels and those possessed of knowledge, maintaining His
   creation with justice; there is no god but He, the Mighty, the
   Wise. [3:18]


                                      ‫ِإَّنَما َيْخ َش ى الَّلَه ِمْن ِع َباِدِه اْلُعَلَماء‬
   And of men and beasts and cattle are various species of it
   likewise; those of His servants only who are possessed of
   knowledge fear Allah; surely Allah is Mighty, Forgiving. [35:28]
Encouragements from the Quran

   ‫ي‬  ‫َّل‬ ‫ا‬   ‫و‬     ‫ا‬ ‫َخ‬     ‫ِت‬ ‫اَل‬ ‫ي‬     ‫ُه‬  ‫ي‬  ‫َّل‬ ‫ا‬   ‫و‬    ‫ْؤ‬   ‫ْل‬ ‫ا‬   ‫َل‬‫ْف‬‫َق َأ‬
    ‫ِذ‬
 ‫َو َن‬      ‫َن‬ ‫ِشُع‬      ‫َص ِهْم‬     ‫ِف‬ ‫َن ْم‬  ‫ِذ‬      ‫َن‬ ‫ِمُن‬   ‫ُم‬     ‫َح‬      ‫ْد‬
                                             ‫ُهْم َعِن الَّلْغِو ُمْعِرُضوَن‬


 Successful indeed are the believers, Who are
 humble in their prayers, And who keep aloof from
 what is vain, [23:3]
‫‪Encouragements from hadith‬‬

        ‫العمل العمل ‪ ،‬ثم النهايه النهايه ‪ ،‬واالستقامه‬
 ‫االستقامه ‪ ،‬ثم الصبر الصبر ‪ ،‬والورع الورع ‪” ،‬اٌن‬
   ‫لكم نهاية فانتهوا الى نهايتكم“ ‪ ،‬و اٌن لكم علمًا‬
   ‫فاهتدوا بعلمكم ‪ ،‬و اٌن لالسالم غاية فانتهوا الى‬
                                ‫غايته‪( .‬نهج البالغه خ ‪)176‬‬
                                                                  ‫َّل‬ ‫َا‬       ‫َأ‬
                                                                ‫ْو ِلَياَء ل ِه‬
432. Amir al-mu'minin, peace be upon him, said:


     ‫ِإَّن َأْوِلَياَء َالَّلِه ُهُم َاَّلِذيَن َنَظُر وا ِإَلى َباِطِن َالُّدْنَيا ِإَذا‬
   ‫َنَظَر َالَّناُس ِإَلى َظاِهِرَها َو ِاْش َتَغُلوا ِبآِج ِلَها ِإَذا ِاْش َتَغَل‬
                                                              ‫َالَّناُس ِبَعاِج ِلَها‬

  The lovers of Allah are those who look at the inward
  side of the world while the other people look at its
  outward side, they busy themselves with its remoter
  benefits while the other people busy themselves in
  the immediate benefits.
Friends of God

‫َفَأَماُتوا ِمْنَها َما َخ ُش وا َأْن ُيِميَتُهْم َو َتَر ُكوا ِمْنَها َما َعِلُموا َأَّنُه َس َيْتُر ُكُهْم َو َر َأُوا‬
                                              ‫َأ‬
        ‫ِاْس ِتْكَثاَر َغْيِرِهْم ِمْنَها ِاْس ِتْقَالًال َو َدَر َكُهْم َلَها َفْوتًا ْعَداُء َما َس اَلَم َالَّناُس َو‬
     ‫ِس ْلُم َما َعاَدى َالَّناُس ِبِهْم ُعِلَم َاْلِكَتاُب َو ِبِه ُعِلُموا َو ِبِهْم َقاَم َاْلِكَتاُب َو ِبِه‬
                  ‫َقاُموا َال َيَرْوَن َمْر ُج ّوًا َفْوَق َما َيْر ُج وَن َو َال َمُخ وفًا َفْوَق َما َيَخ اُفوَن‬

  They kill those things which they feared would have killed them, and
  they leave here in this world what they think would leave them. They
  took the amassing of wealth by others as a small matter and regarded
  it like losing. They are enemies of those things which others love while
  they love things which others hate. Through them, the Qur'an has
  been learnt and they have been given knowledge through the Qur'an.
  With them the Qur'an is staying while they stand by the Qur'an. They
  do not see any object of hope above what they hope and no object of
  fear above what they fear.
People of Remembrance ‫اهل‬
‫الذكر‬

            ‫َال‬   ‫ٌة‬ ‫ا‬  ‫ِت‬     ‫ْل‬‫َغ‬  ‫ْش‬      ‫َل‬‫َف‬ ‫ًال‬     ‫ا‬     ‫ل‬‫َا‬         ‫و‬‫ُذ‬ ‫َخ‬‫ِللِّذْك َأَلْهًال َأ‬
      ‫ُهْم َج َر َو َبْيٌع‬              ‫َت‬ ‫ْم‬               ‫ْن‬       ‫ِم‬
                                                     ‫ُه َن ُّد َي َبَد‬                        ‫ِر‬        ‫ِإَّن‬
                                                                          ‫َأ‬
‫َعْنُه َيْقَطُعوَن ِبِه َّياَم َاْلَحَياِة َو َيْهِتُفوَن ِبالَّز َواِج ِر َعْن َمَح اِرِم َالَّلِه‬
                                                                  … ‫ِفي َأْس َماِع َاْلَغاِفِليَن‬

For remembrance of God there are its devoted adherents
who have adopted it in place of worldly matters so that
the commerce and trade do not turn them away from it.
They pass their life in it and cry with admonishments
 into the ears of the neglectful ones
People of Remembrance

‫َفَكَأَّنَما َقَطُعوا َالُّدْنَيا ِإَلى َاآْل ِخ َر ِة َو ُهْم ِفيَها َفَش اَهُدوا َما َوَر اَء َذِلَك َفَكَأَّنَما ِاَّطَلُعوا‬
             ‫ُغُيوَب َأْهِل َاْلَبْر َز ِخ ِفي ُطوِل َاِإْلَقاَمِة ِفيِه َو َح َّقَقِت َاْلِقَياَمُة َعَلْيِهْم ِع َداِتَها‬
                                                                 ‫َأ‬                         ‫َأِل‬
                     ‫َفَكَش ُفوا ِغ َطاَء َذِلَك ْهِل َالُّدْنَيا َح َّتى َك َّنُهْم َيَرْوَن َما َال َيَر ى َالَّناُس َو‬
                                                                                          ‫َيْسَمُعوَن َما َال َيْسَمُعوَن‬

  It is as though they have finished the journey of this world towards
   the next world and have beheld what lies beyond it. Consequently,
   they have become acquainted with all that befell them in the
   interstice during their long stay therein, and the Day of Judgment
   fulfils its promises for them. Therefore, they removed the curtain
   from these things for the people of the world, till it was as though
   they were seeing what people did not see and were hearing what
   people did not hear.
Verses of irfan

                   ‫َواْذُكِر اْس َم َر ِّبَك َوَتَبَّتْل ِإَلْيِه َتْبِتياًل‬


And remember the name of your Lord and
  devote yourself to Him with (exclusive)
  devotion.[73:8]
Types of Knowledge


 Acquired knowledge ilm al-husuli


 Knowledge with presence ilm al-huzuri



  Mysticism is defined as the urge to reach out to the
                 Infinite by ilm al-huzuri
Types of knowledge (ilm & ma’rifa)

Philosophy                      irfan

   ilm                         ma’rifah

 aql (theoretical intellect)   Basirah (insight)
ilm & ma’rifah

ilm        aims at understanding (idrak)
           limited to the realm of time and space
           uses intellect and thought
           Ilm delimits its object


Ma’rifah   aims at arriving (wosul)
           beyond time and space
           uses insight and self purification
           Ma’rifa removes limitations
ilm & ma’rifah

                                     ‫قال ابن سينا‬:
 ‫الوقوف على حقايق االشياء ليس في قدره البشر و‬
      ‫نحن ال نعرف من االشياء اال الخواص واللوازم‬
               )34 ‫ ص‬,‫ مصر‬,‫واالعراض (التعليقات‬
 Understanding the reality of things is beyond
 human capacity. What we know of the
 objects is but their characteristics, their
 corollaries and their accidents
ilm & ma’rifah

                                  ‫قال مال صدرا‬:
‫حقيقه الوجود يمكن العلم بها بنحو الشهود الحضوري‬

The reality of being could be known through
  Witnessing by Presence
  This could only be
   achieved by inner
faculties of human soul
Considerative Mysticism


Every science has:

A subject Matter (mawdu’)
  The subject matter of every science is that thing which we discuss its
  immediate accidents in that science (‫فیه عن عوارضه الذاتیه (ما یبحث‬
  Therefore that thing (ma’rud) is the subject and the accidents are the
  questions and principles.
Principles (mabadi’)
  The principles are the self-evident, axiomatic and a priori issues and
  accidents
Questions (masa’il)
  The questions are those issues in need of discussion
Subject matter, principles and
questions of irfan

Subject matter:
                  God and His attributes
                  ‫موضوع هذا العلم هو الذات االحديه و نعوتها االزليه و صفاتها السرمديه‬
Principles:
              obvious axioms, terminology, its benefits

Questions:
              How diversity comes from God and how it
              returns to Unity, different manifestations of
              His names, the way towards Him,
‫‪Encouragements from hadith‬‬

     ‫فسبحانك مألت كّل شيء و باينت كّل شيء فأنت‬
                            ‫الذي ال يفقدك شيء‬
                    ‫)خطبه اميرالمؤمنين‪ ,‬المسعودي (م‪ ,)346 .‬اثبات الوصيه(‬

‫‪This is what Muslim philosophers say:‬‬


          ‫بسيط الحقيقه كل االشياء وليس بشيء منها‬

‫‪However this is not understood through speculative knowledge‬‬
‫ َبِصيٌر ِاْذ‬،‫ فاِع ٌل ال ِبَمْعَنى اْلَح َر كاِت َو اآلَلِه‬،‫ َو َغْيُر ُكِّل َش ى ء ال ِبُمزاَيَلٍه‬،‫َمَع ُكِّل َش ى ء ال ِبُمقاَر َنٍه‬
                         ‫ ُمَتَوِّحٌد ِاْذ ال َس َكَن َيْس َتاِنُس ِبِه َو ال َيْس َتْوِح ُش ِلَفْقِدِه‬،‫ال َمْنظوَر ِاَلْيِه ِمْن َخ ْلِقِه‬،



    He is with everything but not in physical nearness. He is different from
    everything but not in physical separation. He acts but without connotation of
    movements and instruments. He sees even when there is none to be looked at
    from among His creation. He is only One, such that there is none with whom He
    may keep company or whom He may miss in his absence.
  ‫ َو ال َتْج ِرَبٍه‬.‫ ِبال َر ِوَّيٍه َاجاَلها‬،‫ِاْنَش اَء اْلَخ ْلَق ِاْنشاًء َو ِاْبَتَداُه اْبِتداًء‬
    ‫ َو ال َهماَمِه َنْفٍس اْضَطَر َب فيها‬،‫ َو ال َح َر َكٍه َاْحَدَثها‬،‫ِاْس َتفاَدها‬

He initiated creation most initially and commenced it
  originally, without undergoing reflection, without
  making use of any experiment, without innovating
  any movement, and without experiencing any
  aspiration of mind.
Branches of mysticism

                          mysticism


    Practical mysticism          Considerative mysticism



  Knowledge with presence         Acquired knowledge
Considerative irfan
Human Soul
Human Soul


                                        ‫َوَنْفٍس َوَما َس َّواَها‬
And the soul and Him Who fashioned it, [91:7]

                                                                ‫َأ‬
                                                               ‫ْل‬
                                ‫َف َهَمَها ُج وَر َها َوَتْقَواَها‬
                                                       ‫ُف‬
and inspired it with [discernment between] its virtues
  and vices; [91:8]

                                        ‫َقْد َأْفَلَح َمن َز َّكاَها‬
Human Soul

One who purifies it is certainly felicitous, [91:9]

                              ‫َوَقْد َخ اَب َمن َدَّس اَها‬
And one who betrays it certainly fails. [91:10]
Human Soul

                ‫َأ‬        ‫َأ‬
      ‫ُأَواَل َتُكوُنوا َكاَّلِذيَن َنُس وا الَّلَه َف نَس اُهْم نُفَس ُهْم‬
                                         ‫ْوَلِئَك ُهُم اْلَفاِس ُقوَن‬

 And do not be like those who forget Allah, so
 He made them forget their own souls: these it
 is that are the transgressors. [59:19]
Human Soul


                ‫و‬    ‫ْؤ‬ ‫َال‬  ‫َف‬       ‫نُف‬‫اَّل ي َخ وْا َأ‬
              ‫َس ُهْم ُهْم ُي ِمُن َن‬          ‫ِذ َن ِس ُر‬

 Those who have lost their souls, they will not
 believe. [6:12]
Human Soul


      ‫َوُهْم َيْنَهْوَن َعْنُه َوَيْنَأْوَن َعْنُه َوِإن ُيْهِلُكوَن ِإَّال َأنُفَس ُهْم َوَما‬
                                                                                ‫َيْش ُعُر وَن‬

 And they dissuade [others] from [following] him and
 [themselves] avoid him, and they only bring
 destruction upon their own souls while they do not
 perceive. [6:26]
  )‫قال اميرالمؤمنين (عليه السالم‬

                  ‫من عرف نفسه فقد عرف رّبه‬
Whoever knows his soul know his Lord

 ‫ال تجهل نفسك فان الجاهل معرفة نفسه جاهل بكّل‬
                                           ‫شيء‬
Do not be ignorant to your soul, for the one
who is ignorant to his soul is ignorant to
everything
  )‫قال اميرالمؤمنين (عليه السالم‬

                 ‫من جهل نفسه كان بغيره اجهل‬
Who is ignorant of their soul is more ignorant
of other things

               ‫كيف يعرف غيره من يجهل نفسه‬
How one can know other things when they
don’t know themselves?
The three different levels of the world
of creation

 The witnessed world (alam al-shahada)


 The medium world (alam al-mithal, barzakh)


 The world of intellects (alam al-uqul)
Alam al-uqul

Alam almithal

   Alam al-mulk
Ayatullah Hasan Zadeh Amoli:
  The knowledge of soul could not be
  attained except through inner unveilings
  and esoteric visions. This is not obtained
  but by self training and mujahadah in
  private accompanied by strong seclusion
  from people and severance from vanities
  of the world and its futile desires. (Sharh
  al-’uyun p. 82)
Human being corresponds with all
these three Worlds

           ‫ االنسان طبيعي و مثالي و عقلي و الهي‬
 Human body corresponds to alam al-
  shahada
 Human khiyal corresponds to alam al-mithal
 Human intellect corresponds to alam al-uqul
 The divine aspect corresponds to human con
  nection to God
Divine aspect of man

   ‫لي مع الله وقت ال يسعني فيه ملك مقرب وال نبي‬
                                      ‫مرسل‬

I have times with God which no one could
   tolerate to share with me; neither a close
   angel nor a messenger Prophet
                                            )‫ يونس عن ابي عبدالله (ع‬:‫الكافي‬
  ‫ قلت كيف ذلك جعلت‬.‫ما من ليلة جمعة اال والولياء الله فيها سرور‬
‫ و‬،‫فداك؟ قال اذا كان ليلة الجمعة وافى رسول الله (ص) العرش‬
‫ و لو ال‬،‫وافى االئمة (ع) و وافيت معهم فما ارجع اال بعلم مستفاد‬
                                            .‫ذلك لنفد ما عندى‬

There is not a single Juma night in which there is not
pleasure for friends of God. I said: May I be your ransom
how is this? He said: When night of Juma comes the
Prophet visits the arhs, and the Imams do the same and I
visit with them and I do not return but with learnt
knowledge. Had not this be the case what I have would
.have finished
The Great Human Ruh
(al-Rul al-a’dham)

Al-sir, the Secret
Al-khafi, the Hidden
Al-Ruh, the Spirit
Al-Qalb, the Heart
Al-Kalima, the Logos
Al-Fu’ad, the Impressed
Al-Sadr, the Issuing
Al-Ru’a, the Fear
Al-Aql, Understanding
Al-Nafs, the Soul
Fikr                     hads

Suluk                       jadhbah

Himmat                       amr (ijad)

The perfect man is above the rank of hads in theoretical intellect since he
   is the acquired intellect and all the reality is present before him and
   sees all that is intelligible (ma’qulat) as we see the visible objects.
With regards to unveilings (mukashafat) he is above the rank of jadhbah
   and is continuously annihilated in God.
Their position is the position of amr which is above himmah.
     Principle Concepts of Irfan
 1- Unity wahdat al-wujud
 2- Visionary observation shuhud
 3- Annihilation fana
 4- Self mortification Riyazah, sayr wa suluk
 5- Love

 6- Esotericism and Symbolism
      What is wahdat al-wujud?
      Different opinions about the existence

1- diversity of the existence and the existent
(usually peripatetic philosophers)          ‫کثره الوجود والموجود‬


2- unity of the existence and diversity of the existent
                                        ‫وحده الوجود و كثره الموجود‬
There is one existence and all other beings are mahiyyat
   attributed to the existence; this is possible according to the
   essentiality of mahiyya
      What is wahdat al-wujud?
3- unity of the existence and the existent despite their
   diversity (Mulla Sadra and Pahlaviyyun)
                                           ‫وحده الوجود و‬
   ‫الموجود‬
Although the existence is unique however it has different
   ranks (tashkik) from strong to weak

4- unity of existence (theory of the mystics)       ‫وحده الوجود‬
There is only the existence and all the existent beings are but
   its different manifestations and states and specifications
   ‫مظاهر و شوون و تعیینات‬
‫‪The Concept of Walayah‬‬

‫‪Wilayah = ruler, sovereignty‬‬

‫‪Walayah (wala) = mahabbah, love‬‬
  ‫اعلم ان الواليه ماخوذة من الَولى و هي القرب و لذلك يسمى الحبيب‬
       ‫وليا لكونه قريبا من محبه‪ .‬و في االصطالح هي القرب من الحق‬
                                                       ‫‪.‬سبحانه‬
‫‪Types of walayah‬‬

‫‪General walayah (aammah): for all true believers‬‬
                                                                           ‫الله ولي الذين آمنوا‬


‫‪Specific walayah (khaassah): It is annihilation in‬‬
  ‫‪God‬‬
 ‫و هو الفناء في الله ذاتًَا و صفًه و فعُال ‪ ،‬فا لولي هو الفاني في الله‪ ،‬القْامئ به‪ ،‬الظاهرباسمائه‬
                                                                ‫وصفاته وهي عطائية و كسبية‬
Types of specific walayah

Favoured: through attraction towards God
  before striving, and this is called mahbub;
  also mukhlas

Acquired: through attraction towards God after
  striving, and this is called muhib;
  also mukhlis
      Subsidiary features, inferred
               concepts
 Khanghah, zawiyah, lodge
 Kherghah, sufi robe, patched frock
 Shaykh, murshid, pir, mentor
 Sama’, mystical concerts
 Khalwah, isolation, spiritual retreat
 chellah, forty
 Dhikr
 Si’ah
 Siyaha, travel
Unitary mysticism
The idea of self-annihilation (fana)         The idea of total union
   (ittihad)

Early exponents of the Unitary Mysticism

Abu Yazid al-Bistami

Husayn b. al-Mansur al-Hallaj (d. 300/918)
Lessons learnt from the fate of al-Hallaj


 Later mystics like al-Ghazali and Ibn al-Arabi
   stopped short of the claim of union, ittihad,
   and replaced it by the idea of Tawhid (al-
   Ghazali) and Unity of Being, wahda al-wujud,
   (Ibn al-Arabi).
 Al-Ghazali: ‘extinction in unity’, ‘extinction in extinction’
 Ibn al-Arabi: wahda al-wujud, al-insan al-kamil


            The ultimate goal of the soul


   Al-Ghazali & Ibn al-Arabi           fana       dhawq
   Al-Hallaj and Bistami          ittihad
    Soul According to Ibn Sina and
    Neo-Plutonian

   Ibn Sina: Soul is an ‘extra-corporeal power’ which is the result of the
    combination of the elements in various degrees of ‘moderation’ under
    the influence of heavenly bodies.

bibliography
   Amuli, Sayyed Haydar, Inner Secrets of the Path, Elements Books, 1989.

   Attar, Fariduddin, The Conference of the Birds (mantiq al-tayr), trans. C. S.
    North, Berkeley, 1971.

   Avicenna, Remarks and Admonishments (al-isharat wa al-tanbihat)

   Chittick, C. William : The Sufi Path of Knowledge

   Knysh, Alexander, Islamic Mysticism, A Short History, Brill, Leiden, 2000.

   Mutahhari, Murtada, Understanding Islamic Sciences, ICAS Press, 2002, the
    chapter on Mysticism, PP. 89-141.
bibliography
   al-Qushayri, Abulghasim, al-Risala fi ‘ilm at-tasawwuf, Cairo, 1912.

   --------------, al-Rasa’il al-Qushayriyya, edited and translated by F. M.
    Hassan, Karachi, 1964.

   Schimmel, Annemarie Mystical Dimensions of Islam, the university of North
    Carolina Press, 1975.

   Smith, Margaret, Rabi’a the Mystic and Her Fellow-Saints in Islam,
    Cambridge, 1928.

   Stoddart, Willliam, Sufism, Paragon House, Minnesota, 1985.

   Yathribi, S. Yahya, Irfan-e Nazari, Dafter-e tablighat, Qum, 1380.
terminology
   Rational soul                                         ‫النفس الناطقه‬
     theoretical intellect                                ‫العقل النظرى‬
                             practical intellect           ‫العقل العملى‬
                                                           ‫العقل الفعال‬
                                     acquired intellect ‫العقل المستفاد‬
      appetite                                                  ‫الشهوه‬
    power appetitive                                      ‫القوه الشهويه‬
                                                       anger    ‫الغضب‬
                                       irascible power    ‫القوه الغضبيه‬
   terminology


                                               divine glimpse     ‫الخطفه االلهيه‬
                                                              estimation ‫الوهم‬
estimative power                                              ‫القوه الوهميه‬
                                                         imagination       ‫الخيال‬
                             imaginative power                     ‫القوه الخياليه‬
               divine sovereignty                                         ‫ملكوت‬
                 divine majesty                                           ‫جبروت‬
                                                          divine mystery ‫الهوت‬
                theopathic locution                                    ‫شطحیات‬
              state of speaking b itself                            ‫لسان الحال‬
