Wayfaring (suluk)
 Shaykh Najm al-Din Kubra
O slave of Allah! Know that you are a wayfarer (salik) seeking your
Lord and ultimately one day you would meet Him, as said in a tradition:
Whoever hopes to meet God should know that the time of the meeting
will come. And you should know that God, the Exalted, by His perfect
Might and Wisdom has destined two journeys for the Children of
Adam. One of them is involuntary (qahri), and the other one is
voluntary (ikhtiyari).

In this journey there is no question of moving from one place to
another; neither does it refer to a wayfarer's move­ment in space nor
that of the destination sought. For God, the Exalted, is closer to a
person than his own jugular vein. Here, by `journey' is meant the
removal of the veils that obstruct the vision of the heart and the light of
Divine Attributes from shining in the wayfarer's heart. This is the same
journey for which man has been created.
Repentance
 "Say: O My slaves who have been prodigal to their own hurt. Despair
not of the Mercy of God, who forgiveth all sins. Lo! He is the forgiving
                                                         the Merciful.“

                                               The Holy Quran (39:58)
   "And when those who believe in our revelations come unto thee
    say: Peace be unto you! Your Lord hath prescribed for Himself
 Mercy, that, those whoso of you doth evil and repenteth afterward
thereof and doeth right, (for him) Lo ! God is forgiving, Merciful.”

                                            The Holy Quran (6:54)
“The happiness of God-Almighty from seeing a sinner repenting is
much more than the joy of a lone traveler who finds his missing animal
together with the provisions of journey in a dark night.”
-al-Kafi, vol. 2, p-436.

Imam Al- Sadiq (A) said:
Mu'awiyah ibn Wahab, who said: "I heard Abu 'Abd Allah (A) says:
 'When a servant turns to God with sincere repentance (tawbatan
  nasuhan), God loves him and covers his sins in this world and in
the Hereafter.' I said, 'And how does He cover him? 'The Imam (A)
  replied, "He makes the two angels (assigned to write his deeds)
  forget that which they have written of his sins. Then He inspires
     his bodily members (saying), "Do conceal his sins," and He
   inspires the earth's places (saying), "Conceal the sins that he
used to commit over you." Then he meets God, at the time that he
meets Him, in such a manner that there is nothing to give witness
                   against him regarding any sin."
  Repentance in Dhu al-Qa’dah
On a Sunday of Dhu al-Qa’dah:

Do make ghusl
Make ablution
Perform four rak’ahs of salat; in each rak’ah:
1 x sura fatiha, 3 x sura ikhlas,         1x
   sura falaq, 1 x sura naas

Then say istighfar 70 times
 ‫‪Repentance in Dhu al-Qa’dah‬‬

‫‪Then say:‬‬
                        ‫ال حول و ال قوة اال بالله‬

‫‪Then say:‬‬

     ‫يا عزيز يا غٌفار اغفر لي ذنوبي و ذنوب جميع‬
  ‫المؤمنين و المؤمنات فاٌنه ال يغفر الذنوب اال‬
                                          ‫انت‬
        The first condition

         ‫حسن الخلق و السيره‬

  Beauty of character and conduct

        ‫حسن الخلق نصف الدين‬

The beauty of character is half of the
               faith
   Those who deserve God’s love
   ‫يا محمد وجبت محبتي للمتحابين في ووجبت محبتي للمتعاطفين‬
   ‫ ووجبت محبتي للمتوكلين‬، ‫ ووجبت محبتي للمتواصلين في‬، ‫في‬
      ‫ وليس لمحبتي علم وال غاية وال نهاية وكلما رفعت لهم‬، ‫علي‬
        ‫ اولئك الذين نظروا إلى المخلوقين‬، ‫علما وضعت لهم علما‬
                     ‫بنظري إليهم وال يرفعوا الحوائج إلى الخلق‬

O Muhammad! My love encompasses
those who love for My sake,
and those who show compassion for My sake,
and those who form associations for My sake
and those who rely on Me.
And there is no signpost or boundary or limit to My
love; whenever I remove one sign, I place for
them another.
These are the ones who regard the
people the way I regard them,
and they never ask for their needs from others.
 ‫ ضمن لي بأربع خصال إال‬، ‫يا أحمد وعزتي وجاللي ما من عبد مؤمن‬
                                                    ‫ أدخلته الجنة‬:
                           ، ‫يطوي لسانه فال يفتحه إال بما يعنيه‬
                                     ،‫ويحفظ قلبه من الوسواس‬
                                      ،‫ويحفظ علمي ونظري إليه‬
                                          .‫وتكون قرة عينه الجوع‬

O Ahmad! I swear by My Might and Honour, if a servant
resolves to acquire four qualities for My sake, I will certainly
enter him into paradise;

   to seal his tongue and not open it except in what concerns him.
   to safeguard his heart from temptation.
   to be mindful that I am aware of his acts and am watching him.
   to take hunger as his delight.
                 To begin with
         ‫صمت و جوع و سهر و عزلت و ذکر بدوام‬
             ‫ناتمامان جهان را کند این پنج تمام‬

Silence, hunger, night vigil, seclusion
           and continuous remembrance of God
Are the five things that make perfect
                       the imperfect of the world
                 Silence
‫يا أحمد عليك بالصمت فان أعمر القلوب قلوب‬
                               ‫الصالحين‬
                             ، ‫والصامتين‬
   ‫وإن أخرب القلوب قلوب المتكلمين بما ال‬
                                . ‫يعنيهم‬

O Ahmad! Adopt silence, because the most
  flourishing hearts are of those who are
  virtuous and silent,
and the most barren hearts are of those who
  indulge in vain and idle speech.
                                Hunger
                                                      ‫يا رب ما ميراث الجوع ؟‬
    ‫ وخفة المؤونة‬، ‫ والحزن الدائم‬، ‫ والتقرب إلي‬، ‫ وحفظ القلب‬، ‫ الحكمة‬: ‫قال‬
                   . ‫ وال يبالي عاش بيسر أو بعسر‬، ‫ وقول الحق‬، ‫بين الناس‬
                             ‫يا أحمد هل تدري بأي وقت يتقرب العبد إلى الله ؟‬
                                                               . ‫ال يا رب‬: ‫قال‬
                                                  ‫ إذا كان جايعا أو ساجدا‬: ‫قال‬

My Lord! What is the benefit of hunger?
He replied: Wisdom,
and protection of the heart,
and proximity to Me,
and constant sadness,
and needing light provision among the people,
and truthful speech
and indifference to whether life brings hardship or ease.
O Ahmad! Do you know when a servant attains proximity to God?
He said, “No, my Lord!”
He said, “When he is either in a state of hunger, or in prostration.”
                         Hunger
                                     ‫ يا رب ما أول العبادة ؟‬: ‫قال‬
                               . ‫ أول العبادة الصمت والصوم‬: ‫قال‬
                                  ‫ يا رب وما ميراث الصوم ؟‬: ‫قال‬
      ‫ والمعرفة‬، ‫ الصوم يورث الحكمة والحكمة تورث المعرفة‬: ‫قال‬
  ‫ بعسر أم‬، ‫ فإذا استيقن العبد ال يبالي كيف أصبح‬، ‫تورث اليقين‬
                                                        . ‫بيسر‬

He asked, “My Lord! What is the essence of worship.”
He stated, “The essence of worship is silence and fasting.”
He asked, “My Lord! And what is the benefit of fasting?”
He stated,
“Fasting gives rise to wisdom,
and wisdom gives rise to godly knowledge (ma’rifah),
and godly knowledge gives rise to certitude;
so when a servant attains certitude, he no longer cares how he
   passes his days and nights, whether in ease or hardship.
    The benefits of eating less and speaking less

    ‫يا أحمد إن العبد إذا أجاع بطنه وحفظ لسانه علمته الحكمة وإن كان‬
‫ وإن كان مؤمنا تكون حكمته له‬، ‫كافرا تكون حكمته حجة عليه و وباال‬
   ‫ ويبصر ما لم‬، ‫ فيعلم ما لم يكن يعلم‬، ‫نورا وبرهانا وشفاء ورحمة‬
                                                      . ‫يكن يبصر‬
     ‫ وابصره‬، ‫فأول ما أبصره عيوب نفسه حتى يشتغل عن عيوب غيره‬
                         . ‫دقائق العلم حتى ال يدخل عليه الشيطان‬

 O Ahmad! When a servant remains hungry and guards his tongue,
 then I teach him wisdom. Then, if such a person is an unbeliever,
 this wisdom will become a witness against him and a hardship.
 And if he is a believer, then his wisdom will become for him an
 illumination, a logical reasoning, a healing and a mercy. He will
 know what he did not know before and he will see what he did not
 see before.
 The first thing that I will show him will be his own faults, before he
 gets involved with the faults of others.
 And I will show him the thorough details of knowledge so that
 Shaytan can not influence him.
        Three pieces of advice on self-discipline
         From Imam al-Sadiq to Inwan al-Basri

firstly do not eat that which you have no
   appetite for, for this brings about idiocy and
   stupidity.
Secondly do not eat unless you are hungry.
Thirdly when you do eat, eat only that which is
   lawful (Halaal) and begin in the Name of
   Allah,
 And remind yourself of the tradition of the
   Prophet (saw): ‘There is no vessel that man
   fills worse than his own stomach’. So if you
   must fill it, then allow one third of it for food,
   another third for drink, and keep the last third
   for air.
      Three pieces of advice to do with clemency
        From Imam al-Sadiq to Inwan al-Basri

firstly if someone were to say to you: ‘If you
   dare say a word, I’ll give you ten back’, then
   you should be such as to reply: ‘Even if you
   say ten words, you will not hear a single one
   back from me’.
Secondly, when someone insults you, say: ‘If
   you are right in what you are saying, then
   may Allah forgive me for it, and if you are
   wrong then may He forgive you for it’.
 And thirdly, when someone treats you harshly,
   return it with good counsel and pray for Him.
                                    Night vigil

   ‫ْم َكاُنوا َقْبَل َذِلَك‬ ‫ْم ِإَّنُه‬
                          ‫ُهْم‬      ‫ُهْم‬                                                    ‫ِإَّن اْلُمَّتِقيَن ِفي َج‬
                                      ‫َجَّنَّناٍت َوُعُيوٍن آِخ ِذيَن َما آَتاُهْمَأْلَر ُّبُه‬
        ‫ِس ِنيَن َكاُنوا َقِلياًل ِّمَن الَّلْيِل َما َيْهَجُعوَن َوِبا ْس َح اِر ُهْم َيْس َتْغِفُر وَن‬        ‫ُمْح‬
                                                                                                             ‫ْحِس‬




As to the Righteous, they will be in the midst of Gardens and
Springs,

Taking joy in the things which their Lord gives them, because,
before then, they lived a good life.

They were in the habit of sleeping but little by night,
And in the hour of early dawn, they (were found) praying for
Forgiveness; [51:15-18]
                                          Night vigil
                   ‫َأ‬                                 ‫َأ‬                                                                 ‫َأ‬
‫َيا ُّيَه ا اْلُم َّز ِّم ُل ُق ِم الَّلْيَل ِإاَّل َق ِلياًل ِنْص َف ُه ِو انُق ْص ِمْنُه َق ِلياًل ْو ِز ْد َعَلْيْيِه‬
‫ِه‬
         ‫َوَر ِّتِلَأ اْلُق ْر آَن َتْر ِتَأياًل ِإَّنا َس ُنْلِق ي َعَلْيَك َق ْو اًل َثِق ياًل ِإن َناِش َئَة الَّلْيِل‬
                      ‫ِه َي َش ُّد َو ْط ًءا َو ْق َو ُم ِق ياًل ِإَّن َلَك ِف ي َالَّنَه اِر َس ْبًح ا َطِو ياًل‬

O thou folded in garments!
Stand (to prayer) by night, but not all night,-
Half of it,- or a little less,
Or a little more; and recite the Qur'an in slow, measured
rhythmic tones.
Soon shall We send down to thee a weighty Message.
Truly the rising by night is most potent for governing (the
soul), and most
suitable for (framing) the Word (of Prayer and Praise).
True, there is for thee by day prolonged occupation with
ordinary duties [63:1-7]
                                   Night vigil
                                                                                                         ‫َأ‬
   ‫ِقِم الَّصَالَة ِلُدُلوِك الَّش ْمِس ِإَلى َغَس ِق الَّلْيِل َوُقْر آَن اْلَفْج ِر ِإَّن ُقْر آَن‬
 ‫اْلَفْج ِر َكاَن َمْش ُهوًدا َوِمَن الَّلْيِل َفَتَهَّجْد ِبِه َناِفَلًة َّلَك َعَس ى َأن َيْبَعَثَك‬
                                                                          ‫َر ُّبَك َمَقاًما َّمْح ُموًدا‬

Establish regular prayers - at the sun's decline till the
  darkness of the night, and the morning prayer and
  reading: for the prayer and reading in the morning carry
  their testimony.

And pray in the night: (it would be) an additional prayer (or
  spiritual profit) for thee: soon will thy Lord raise thee to
  a Station of Praise and Glory! [17:78-79]
                                Night vigil
‫َأَّمْن ُهَو َقاِنٌت آَناء الَّلْيِل َس اِج ًدا َوَقاِئًما َيْح َذُر اآْل ِخ َر َة َوَيْر ُج و‬
          ‫َر ْح َمَة َر ِّبِه ُقْل َهْل َيْس َتِوي اَّلِذيَن َيْعَلُموَن َواَّلِذيَن اَل‬
                                              ‫ا‬‫َب‬ ‫َيْعَل وَن َّن ا َيَتَذَّك ُأ ُلوا اَأْل‬
                                                 ‫ْل‬
                                           ‫ِب‬               ‫ُر ْو‬          ‫ِإ َم‬   ‫ُم‬


What! he who is obedient during hours of the
 night, prostrating himself and standing, takes
 care of the hereafter and hopes for the mercy
 of his Lord! Say: Are those who know and
 those who do not know alike? Only the men
 of understanding are mindful. [39:9]
                             Seclusion

      ‫ُك‬‫َل‬    ‫ُل‬       ‫َقاُلوا َل ا َأ‬                       ‫وا الَّلْغ َأ‬
    ‫َو ْم‬  ‫ا‬‫َن‬   ‫ا‬ ‫َم‬‫ْع‬    ‫َن‬         ‫ُه َو‬‫ْن‬‫َع‬    ‫وا‬      ‫ْع‬
                                                      ‫َو َر ُض‬             ‫َوِإَذا َس ِمُع‬
                              ‫ي‬   ‫ا‬  ‫ْل‬‫ا‬ ‫ي‬            ‫اَل‬  ‫ُك‬  ‫َل‬‫َع‬    ‫اَل‬    ‫ُك‬ ‫ُل‬ ‫ا‬ ‫ْع‬‫َأ‬
                           ‫َج ِهِل َن‬         ‫َم ْم َس ٌم ْي ْم َنْبَتِغ‬



And when they hear idle talk they turn aside
 from it and say: We shall have our deeds and
 you shall have your deeds; peace be on you,
 we do not desire the ignorant. [Shakir 28:55]
                                    Seclusion

   ‫ْيِه َتْبِتياًل َر ُّب اْلَمْش ِرِق َواْلَمْغِرِب اَل ِإَلَه ِإاَّل‬
                                                                  ‫َواْذُكِر اْس َم َر ِّبَك َوَتَبَّتْل ِإَلْيِه‬
           ‫َجِمياًل‬
               ‫ُهَو َفاَّتِخ ْذُه َوِكياًل َواْصِبْر َعَلى َما َيُقوُلوَن َواْهُج ْر ُهْم َهْج ًر ا َج ِم‬

And remember the name of your Lord and devote
  yourself to Him with (exclusive) devotion.
  The Lord of the East and the West-- there is no god
  but He-- therefore take Him for a protector.
  And bear patiently what they say and avoid them with
  a becoming avoidance. [Shakir 73:10]
Continuous Remembrance

  ‫يا ايها الذين آمنوا اذكرواالله ذكرًا كثيرًا‬
                       ‫و‬
             ‫سّبحوه بكرة و اصيًال‬

O you who have faith! Remember God
             .abundantly
.And glorify Him morning and evening
                 )33/41-42(
       People of Remembrance
                        ‫اهل الذكر‬
            ‫ْل‬‫َغ‬ ‫ْش‬      ‫َل‬‫َف‬ ‫ًال‬     ‫ا‬      ‫ل‬‫َا‬      ‫و‬‫ُذ‬ ‫َخ‬‫ِللِّذْك َأَلْهًال َأ‬
       ‫ُهْم‬        ‫ْم َت‬         ‫ُه ِمَن ُّدْنَي َبَد‬                   ‫ِر‬          ‫ِإَّن‬
                                ‫َأ‬
‫ِتَج اَر ٌة َو َال َبْيٌع َعْنُه َيْقَطُعوَن ِبِه َّياَم َاْلَحَياِة َو َيْهِتُفوَن‬
   … ‫ِبالَّز َواِج ِر َعْن َمَح اِرِم َالَّلِه ِفي َأْس َماِع َاْلَغاِفِليَن‬

For remembrance of God there are its
devoted adherents who have adopted it in
place of worldly matters so that the
commerce and trade do not turn them
away from it. They pass their life in it and
cry with admonishments into the ears of
 the neglectful ones
         People of Remembrance
‫َفَكَأَّنَما َقَطُعوا َالُّدْنَيا ِإَلى َاآْل ِخ َر ِة َو ُهْم ِفيَها َفَش اَهُدوا َما َوَر اَء َذِلَك َفَكَأَّنَما‬
                                                                                             ‫َأ‬
                     ‫ِاَّطَلُعوا ُغُيوَب ْهِل َاْلَبْر َز ِخ ِفي ُطوِل َاِإْلَقاَمِة ِفيِه َو َح َّقَقِت َاْلِق‬
            ‫ِقَيَياَمُة‬
        ‫َحَّتَّتى َكَأَّنُهْم َيَرْوَن َما َال‬
                                            ‫َعَلْيِهْم ِع َداِتَها َفَكَش ُفوا ِغ َطاَء َذِلَك َأِلْهِل َالُّدْنَيا َح‬
                                                            ‫َيَر ى َالَّناُس َو َيْس َمُعوَن َما َال َيْس َمُعوَن‬

It is as though they have finished the journey of this world
towards the next world and have beheld what lies beyond
it. Consequently, they have become acquainted with all
that befell them in the interstice during their long stay
therein, and the Day of Judgment fulfils its promises for
them. Therefore, they removed the curtain from these
things for the people of the world, till it was as though
they were seeing what people did not see and were
hearing what people did not hear.
            ‫فاذكروني اذكركم‬


Remember me, I will remember you.
(2:152)
"God-Almighty had said: 'Oh son of Adam!
Remember me in your self so that I would remember
you in My Self;. Oh son of Adam! Remember me in
solitude so that I may remember you in solitude; Oh
son of Adam! Remember me in congregation so that I
remember you in a congregation much better than
yours," and said: 'Every servant who remembers
God-Almighty among the human beings, God-
Almighty remembers him among the angels."
-Wasail al-Shi’a, vol 4, p-1185
“Realizing that He remembers you
would create in you humbleness,
modesty and brokenness."
Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 93, p-158.
‫اَّلِذيَن آَمُنوْا َوَتْطَمِئُّن ُقُلوُبُهم ِبِذْكِر الّلِه َأَال‬
          }28{ ‫ِبِذْكِر الّلِه َتْطَمِئُّن اْلُقُلوُب‬


    Those who believe and whose
     hearts are set at rest by the
  remembrance of Allah; now surely
   by Allah's remembrance are the
       hearts set at rest [13:28].
